LEA is the local education agency, also referred to as the local school district.
IDEA is the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, the Federal special education law that guarantees FAPE.
FAPE is Free Appropriate Public Education, the provision in IDEA to ensure states provide services to eligible students with disabilities.
The FREE in FAPE means school services must be provided at public expense, under public supervision and direction, without charge. Uniformly assessed fees are permissible. A fee for a service may be charged only if this is a fee for all students in the school. The term "at no cost" does not preclude incidental fees that are normally charged to students without disabilities or their parents as part of the regular education program.
Appropriate doesn’t mean the best. It means, All students, including those performing at grade level and those unable to perform at grade level, the school must offer an IEP that is “reasonably calculated to enable a child to make progress in light of the child’s circumstances.”
IEP is an individualized Education Program that provides a written plan designed to meet the unique needs of the child with an exceptionality.
LRE is least restrictive environment. LRE is the foundation principle in IDEA that children with disabilities should be educated with their nondisabled peers, to the greatest extent possible.
Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports is an evidence-based three-tier framework for improving and integrating all of the data, systems, and practicing affecting student outcomes every day. It’s a way to support everyone – especially students with disabilities – to create the kinds of schools where all students are successful.
PBIS isn’t a curriculum you purchase or something you learn during a one-day professional development training. It is a commitment to addressing student behavior through systems change. When it’s implemented well, students achieve improved social and academic outcomes, schools experience reduced exclusionary discipline practices, and school personnel feel more effective.
(Center for Positive Behavior Interventions & Supports, a U.S. Department of Education funded Technical Assistance & Dissemination Center)
A functional Behavioral Assessment is used to determine the function of the behavior and the factors that maintain it.  It helps teachers to understand the reason(s) (i.e., the function or functions) for a student’s behavior and then to use this information to design an intervention that will help the student learn a new, more acceptable method of getting what he or she wants. In many cases, challenging behaviors are an inappropriate way for a student to either obtain something desired (e.g., attention, a tangible item) or avoid something not preferred (e.g., a task or activity). An FBA should be considered when basic classroom interventions are ineffective and when the behavior:
• Could cause injury to the student or others
• Is intense or occurs frequently
• Places the student at risk for referral to special education or a more restrictive placement
(The IRIS Center, a U.S. Department of Education funded Technical Assistance & Dissemination Center)
A BIP is a Behavior Intervention Plan.  Many students with disabilities – particularly those with emotional or behavioral disorders, have IEP’s that contain a BIP, which provide individualized procedures to prevent undesirable behaviors or to intervene when those behaviors occur.  
(The IRIS Center, a U.S. Department of Education funded Technical Assistance & Dissemination Center)
A Manifestation Determination Review is used if a student with a disability violates the school’s code of conduct, the student’s IEP team must meet to determine whether the behavior was the result of either:
• The student’s disability, or
• Poor implementation of the student’s IEP.
