What is an LEA?
What is IDEA?
What is FAPE?
What is an IEP?
What is LRE?
What is PBIS?
What is a FBA?
What is a BIP?
What is a MDR?
What is Child Find?
Should I have my child evaluated for special education?
What is RTI?
What is the School Building Level Committee?
Can the school district refuse to evaluate my child until he or she goes through the RTI process?
Can the school use my private evaluation to expedite the evaluation process?
Is the public school system required to evaluate my child that attends a private school for free?
What does 1508 evaluation mean?
What are the exceptionalities?
How long does it take to get my child evaluated?
Can the school ask for evaluation extensions?
What happens if the parent disagree with the evaluation?
If my child is eligible for special education services, how long will it take to start the services?
Will I receive a notice about the IEP meeting?
Does the school have to tell me who will be attending the meeting?
Who are the IEP team members?
Are parents equal IEP team members?
Who is considered a parent on the IEP team?
What is the parent of the child has a disability or doesn’t speak English?
Is the student required to attend the IEP Meeting?
Can IEP members miss the IEP meeting, come in late, or leave early?
Is there a time limit on IEP meetings?
Who can have access to my child’s IEP?
Are there different types of IEPs?
Can an IEP be amended without a meeting?
What does placement mean?
How is placement decided?
Will my child go to their regular neighborhood school?
Do parents need to consent to special education services?
What happens if I disagree with the services or placement in the IEP?
Can my child attend an inclusion class?
Is there an age limit on the different ages in the same special education class?
How often do we have an IEP meeting?
Can the school purchase my child an Assistive Technology Device?
How does my child qualify for Extended School Year Services (ESY)?
Can my Child’s IEP include extracurricular services?
What is the age a child can receive special education services?
Does my child have to fail in order to qualify for special education services?
Will students aging out of Early Steps automatically qualify for special education services?
Why does my child need to be evaluated by the school district if he or she already has an autism diagnosis from the doctor?
Is Special Education only for children with intellectual delays?
